feat(chacha12): Consolidate PRNG for fuzzing (#3232)
endojs/endo: .changeset/endo-chacha12.md

---
'@endo/chacha12': minor
'@endo/hex': patch
'@endo/ocapn': patch
---

Add `@endo/chacha12` package: a pure-JavaScript ChaCha12 keystream
together with `makeRandom(seed)`, a seedable pseudorandom number
generator built on its keystream.

Rewires the `@endo/hex` encode/decode benchmarks and the `@endo/ocapn`
syrup and passable fuzz tests to seed their deterministic PRNG from
`@endo/chacha12`, removing the duplicate vendored `_xorshift.js`
helpers.

ChaCha12 is the 12-round variant of Daniel J. Bernstein's ChaCha
family.
The block function is identical to ChaCha20 modulo the round count
(6 double-rounds vs 10), so the implementation, API, and harden
discipline mirror the sibling 20-round implementation.
ChaCha12 trades cryptographic margin for throughput; for
deterministic test fixtures, property-based testing, and fuzzing
the extra speed is generally the right tradeoff.

The keystream is verified against three published test vectors

> from `draft-strombergson-chacha-test-vectors` (TC1, TC4, TC8).

Reviewer: Might as well make this a hyperlink to https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-strombergson-chacha-test-vectors-01 .

Each function accepts a `RandomSource`, which is simply a function `(out: Uint8Array) => void` matching the shape of `crypto.getRandomValues` (minus the return value).
Names follow the TC39 [proposal-random-functions](https://tc39.es/proposal-random-functions/) translation `Random.method` -> `randomMethod`.
Each sampler is its own module so consumers can import only what they use:

```js
import { random } from '@endo/random/random.js';
import { randomInt } from '@endo/random/int.js';
```

The package also ships `@endo/random/seeds.js`, exporting the canonical `bobsCoffee32` 32-byte seed shared across Endo deterministic fuzz suites.

Add `@endo/chacha12`: a pure-JavaScript ChaCha12 keystream.
The factory `makeChaCha12(key)` returns a `ChaCha12Generator` record `{ next, getState, clone, fillRandomBytes }`.
The `fillRandomBytes` method has the shape `(out: Uint8Array) => void`, conforming to `@endo/random`'s `RandomSource` and to `crypto.getRandomValues`-style ergonomics; it can be passed directly to the samplers.

> The remaining methods expose the keystream's internal state (snapshot via `getState`, independent copy via `clone`, signed-int32 pull via `next`) so the generator satisfies `pure-rand` v8's `RandomGenerator` interface structurally, driving `fast-check` v4's `randomType` parameter without a separate adapter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The remaining methods expose the keystream's internal state (snapshot via `getState`, independent copy via `clone`, signed-int32 pull via `next`) so the generator satisfies the [`pure-rand` v8 `RandomGenerator` interface](https://github.com/dubzzz/pure-rand/blob/v8.0.0/src/types/RandomGenerator.ts) structurally and can be used directly as a [`fast-check` v4 `randomType` parameter](https://fast-check.dev/docs/api/interfaces/Parameters/#randomtype).
```

---
'@endo/random': minor
'@endo/chacha12': minor
'@endo/hex': patch
'@endo/ocapn': patch
---

Add `@endo/random`: a source-agnostic library of random sampling
functions (`random`, `randomInt`, plus the underlying
`randomUint8` / `randomUint16` / `randomUint24` / `randomUint32` /
`randomUint53` readers).  Each function accepts a `RandomSource`,
which is simply a function `(out: Uint8Array) => void` matching the
shape of `crypto.getRandomValues` (minus the return value).  Names
follow the TC39
[proposal-random-functions](https://tc39.es/proposal-random-functions/)
translation `Random.method` -> `randomMethod`.  Each sampler is its
own module so consumers can import only what they use:

```js
import { random } from '@endo/random/random.js';
import { randomInt } from '@endo/random/int.js';
```

The package also ships:

- `@endo/random/fast-check.js` -- bidirectional adapters between
  `RandomSource` and `pure-rand`'s `RandomGenerator` (the contract
  `fast-check` uses via the `randomType` parameter), plus a
  `randomType` builder.  Imports nothing from `pure-rand` or
  `fast-check`; depends only on those interfaces being structurally

>   compatible.

Author: No longer true.

- `@endo/random/seeds.js` -- the canonical `bobsCoffee64` 32-byte
  seed, shared across Endo deterministic fuzz suites.

Add `@endo/chacha12`: a pure-JavaScript ChaCha12 keystream.  The
factory `makeChaCha12(key)` returns a `(out: Uint8Array) => void`
function that conforms to `@endo/random`'s `RandomSource` and to
`crypto.getRandomValues`-style ergonomics; pass it directly to the
samplers.  The keystream is cross-checked against three published
ChaCha12 test vectors from
[`draft-strombergson-chacha-test-vectors-01`](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-strombergson-chacha-test-vectors-01)

> (TC1, TC4, TC8).

Author: The interface documented here is stale. We changed to an interface consistent with pure-rand-v8, structurally, with a fillRandomBytes function that satisfies RandomSource, like crypto.getRandomBytes.

Rewires the `@endo/hex` encode/decode benchmarks and the
`@endo/ocapn` syrup and passable fuzz tests to draw deterministic
bytes from `@endo/chacha12` directly, using the shared seed from
`@endo/random/seeds.js`.

> 

Author: Omit as not interesting to package authors updating dependencies.
